The sunset painted warning colors across Lilith’s skin as she sat on the edge of the bed, her silhouette a dark promise against the dying light. Silas dozed behind her, his breath shallow and uneven. He remained unaware or uncaring that their game of metaphysical pillow talk was about to become, as it always was and always would be, terrifyingly real.
“Do you know how many lives you’ve lived to reach this place? How many times you screamed coming out of a bloody womb? How many times you died cold and alone?” Her voice a silken caress, a sharp glint in her eyes. She ran her fingers along his back, and he stirred, his muscles protesting with a dull ache as he rolled over to face her, eyelids heavy. The humid room smelled of sweat and perfume. The chatter and traffic of the city rode the warm breeze through the open window.
“No.” His gaze slid over her with a flicker of exhaustion and lingering desire.
“I do.” She slipped off the bed and walked over to the window. The setting sun played upon her naked body, painting her skin with hues of gold and crimson. She brushed her damp hair away from her face, and it fell, sticking to the back of her neck, a gesture that seemed both innocent and calculated.
“Where, pray tell, did you come by that information?” His voice was hoarse as he reached for the glass of tepid water on the nightstand. They played this game every time, fanciful conversation was the only thing their spent bodies had the energy for.
She turned, looking at him. Her lips curved into a slow smile that held both allure and a hint of something colder, ancient and predatory. “I have seen them.” Her voice a breath of warning.
He edged his legs off the bed and stretched, setting the glass down. “Who looks outside, dreams; who looks inside, awakes.” His tone challenging as he held out his hand to her.
“Our friend Jung, the embodied consummation of our vocations.” She danced into the bathroom, waving his hand away dismissively, closing the door behind her. She the psychiatrist, he the philosopher.
After pulling on his rumpled pants from the floor, he walked to the mirror. Silas Phalavan smiled as he noted the slight streaks of gray creeping into his dark brown hair and beard. She said it complimented his oval face, sharp nose and well-defined jawline. His hand moved automatically up to that jaw as he turned his face to the side, letting Lilith’s strange pronouncement simmer in his mind. The ritual affirmation he found so soothing formed on his lips, “I am boundless awareness”.
Inspecting his face, his own blue eyes seemed to whisper of those lives. The gold frame of his glasses boundaries around lessons learned, forgotten and learned again. The hairs on his neck appeared to rise at an imminent revelation within him, until his watch chimed, announcing it was time to leave for dinner.
“Miss Azami.” He walked over to the bathroom door and knocked, his voice returning to its natural hoarseness, the sound of his footsteps on the hardwood floor obscuring the epiphany. “Our chariot awaits.”
The closed door muffled her voice. “I thought our reservation was at nine.” The Walnut Persian Restaurant was a twenty-minute ride at least, but she didn’t care. The nights in Manchester were meant to be just a bit behind schedule.
Mornings in Manchester were a different story, especially following on the heels of behind schedule nights. Memories of the restaurant and what followed crowded Lilith’s mind as she made her way across campus in the early light. It reflected off the modern additions to the historic buildings, onto her face and the empty pathways awaiting the morning rush.
Silas walked towards her, heading to his office in the Arthur Lewis Building, seeming to avert his gaze when she came into view. When he seemed not to notice her, hesitation in her stride suggested her mention of his past lives the night before might have been a mistake. Lilith narrowed her eyes as if preparing to feel Silas out as a student barreled past her, almost nudging her out of his way.
“Professor Phalavan!” The student quickened his pace even further as he closed the distance with Silas. They were already in conversation as Lilith approached. Whether Silas had taken her confession seriously the prior evening, or had given it any further thought, would remain a mystery for now.
She neared him as he argued with the student over a late assignment. He gave only a cursory look toward her, a slight nod of recognition as he informed the student he couldn’t make exceptions.
“I’ll see you at our lecture later, Stewart,” he said, cutting off the student’s desperate protestations. He glanced at the red brick facade of the Arthur Lewis Building longingly, as if anticipating the much needed coffee awaiting him within. Silas then returned his attention to Stewart, his resolve softened by his seemingly limitless patience. “Or you can always come to office hours.” 
Lilith walked past them and continued to the Crawford House, already having satisfied her own morning craving for caffeine. Her pace picked back up as if a new resolve had taken hold. She looked back, noticing the distance between her and Silas widening as cars passed by on the street and the campus went about its business.
That business continued later in the morning in the lecture hall, where Silas collected assignments and began the unit of his course on Eastern philosophy. “Today we are leaving behind the objective, linear thinking we have been looking at in this course so far for the subjective, cyclical explorations of Eastern philosophy.”
The long windows of the hall sent the morning light into his eyes. He shaded them to look out at the students packed into the tiers of seats, rising away from him, as their attention did the longer he spoke. He caught Stewart’s glare from near the top of the hall, unable to tell if it was one of anger, disappointment or resignation. Turning to the whiteboard, he wrote ‘TAT TVAM ASI’ in quick, squeaky strokes.
Keystrokes and pen scribbles sounded out as the students added the phrase to their notes. Silas tapped each of the three words in succession. “That. Thou. Art.” Even with his voice raised and the keyboards clicking once more, he could clearly make out another conversation erupting among some students.
Silas shielded his eyes from the sunlight again as he peered out to see the commotion. “Is he ok?” “Does he seem ok?” “He needs help.” “Professor?” Above it all, a single phrase repeated and grew in volume. “I am not that!” Stewart was standing, removing his t-shirt, having already tossed his sweatshirt at the row of students in front of him.
Without thinking, a look of concern and empathy stealing over his face, Silas instructed his teaching assistant to call for Miss Azami and ran up the stairs. Stewart’s fellow students had already cleared the surrounding seats, but having done so put themselves in the path to him. Turning to the side and putting his hand out before him, Silas cleared a path as he watched Stewart kick off the last leg of his jeans.
“Stewart, look at me.” Silas reached the aisle, students around him breathing a sigh of relief as it became apparent Stewart would not remove his underwear next. “Stewart, look at me.”
“I am not that!” The skinny kid in his boxers was screaming, arms wide and gaze focused on the whiteboard. Silas inched closer to Stewart, trying to get his attention, occasionally turning to shake his head at the snickering students, trying unsuccessfully to get them to stop from laughing out loud. 
“Class dismissed. Read Chapter 6 of the Chandogya Upanishad for next time.” Silas noticed a small cheer as he motioned the students to leave and sat down a few chairs from where Stewart was still screaming.
“I am not that!” Again and again Stewart insisted, his voice lowering from a scream to a soft insistent chant. Silas remained almost impossibly calm, eyes remaining forward, not turning to look at the near naked teenager, letting him run out of steam on his own. Noticing Lilith come into the hall followed by a campus security officer, Silas clapped three times, sharply, loudly.
Stewart turned, one last “I am not that” escaping in a whisper as he collapsed into his seat. Silas nodded and smiled knowingly, almost lovingly, not losing eye contact with the distressed student. Lilith approached from the other side, slowly.
“Stewart? Stewart Sheldon?” Lilith drew his attention to her, leaving Silas breathing a sigh of relief as he stood and walked back toward the stairs, beckoning the security officer to approach him rather than Stewart and Lilith. The security guard’s shoulders dropped, releasing tension upon noting that Silas had complete faith in Lilith’s ability to handle the situation.
Lilith sat down next to Stewart, handing him the jeans and t-shirt she had collected on her way over to him. She spoke in a calm, reassuring tone, one she recognized now as she used it to diffuse the situation and assess the student. It was the tone Silas often achieved in conversations with her. She turned her attention down to where Silas and the security officer were quietly discussing what had happened during the class.
Silas noticed her looking at him, remembering how she had seen his interaction with Stewart earlier that morning. He turned again to the whiteboard and Lilith noticed something click in him as he shook his head and muttered Stewart’s insight. “I am not that.” A wave of release washed over Silas. A weight he didn’t know he had been carrying suddenly vanished, a profound peace almost lifting him from the ground.
The look and words sent a visible shudder through Lilith as she walked Stewart toward the door while he clumsily put his clothes back on. She looked up at Silas as if in frustration at not having been able to delay the breakthrough. Despair mixed with respect for his unwavering spirit. Silas stared back, apparently lost in his transformation, the realization that he possessed no thou that could be that. 
The security officer collected the backpack and sweatshirt Stewart had left behind and couldn’t help but notice the intense moment Silas and Lilith shared from across the hall.
It was a moment that neither had forgotten when they bumped into each other in the empty academic hallway a little while later. The afternoon shadows played through the stained glass windows as they met. Dark wood paneling covered the wall behind the bench where they turned to sit. Lilith drew close to Silas, placing her hand on his knee.
“How’s Stewart?” She could hear the genuine concern in his voice.
“Broken.” Silas nodded and turned from her. “You handled the situation well, Silas. How are you doing?”
“Lilith…” His words didn’t seem to come. She patted his knee as he looked back to her.
“I’ll make you an appointment with Ellen.” Lilith leaned in toward him, an easy empathy almost contrived. “You should talk through the experience. You seem shaken.”
Silas shook his head, his glasses sliding down his nose. “That’s just it. I’m not shaken Lilith.” She pulled back a bit as he pushed his glasses back up, smiling. “I think Stewart showed me something. Something about myself, or lack thereof.”
Her eyes could have been mistaken as betraying sadness, when it was actually worry they tried to hide. “You know this is where I caution you not to mistake an emotional response to a traumatic event with genuine spiritual insight.”
The soft laugh that escaped him took them both by surprise. Lilith stood, as if her attempts at intimacy through proximity had proved fruitless. “Ellen will just tell me to journal about it, meditate on it, maybe take some time off.”
“She’s a professional Silas, as are you.” Lilith was growing short with him, taking a step back, looking past him down the hallway as if wishing someone would come along to intrude on their private moment. “She wouldn’t be wrong.”
He stood up himself, clearing his throat, his own look of resolve mirroring the one Lilith had shown that morning during his confrontation with Stewart. “No, she wouldn’t.”
Lilith straightened her jacket, then reached out to the tweed that Silas wore, running her hands down his chest as if attempting to press out the ever-present wrinkles. Her attempt at closeness fell flat though, Silas placing his own hands on her shoulders, looking into her eyes. “I’ll take a meeting with Ellen later this week. Now I have to prepare for our faculty meeting this afternoon.”
He was too confident, and they both knew it. Lilith nodded and turned around, lost in her growing concern over his spiritual progress as he walked slowly behind her, lost in his dreams of continuing it. The buzz of the air conditioner fought the rare afternoon heat in Manchester, attempting to cool too much space with too little cold air.
The heat was unabated that afternoon in the committee room, the University never having retrofitted the building it was in with air conditioning. Faculty shuffled into the formal space, dragging heavy wooden chairs over the carpeting to make space at the giant oak conference table that dominated the room. The Dean nodded as Silas and Lilith entered the room. “Great job with Mr. Sheldon this morning, you two. From what I gather, your teamwork averted what could have been quite the crisis.”
“Thank you, sir.” Silas beamed with what may have been mistaken for pride if the faculty weren’t so aware of his boundless humility. He smiled at Lilith with a warm confidence, meaning to share in the praise with her, but she frowned.
“It remains a crisis for young Stewart.” Pulling her chair in, Lilith scanned the faces in the room, confident and comfortable in what was usually a tense meeting. “He is doing well, though, and we will transfer him to North Manchester General for observation tomorrow morning.”
“Yes, well.” Flustered in a way they all knew only Lilith could illicit, the Dean took his own seat and shuffled the papers awaiting him. “We have much to get through this afternoon, we might as well get right to it.”
As the group worked through the agenda it became increasingly difficult for the participants to discern if the light around Silas was the afternoon sun hitting him through the blinds or something radiating from within him. Lilith seemed particularly perplexed, paying more attention to his mannerisms than she was to the discussion around her. A look of focused concern set itself on her face, so stern that even Silas took notice. The moment was lost to a general groan from the room as the Dean moved on to the next agenda item.
“Ongoing issues with our course evaluation system.” Low student responsiveness, outdated and biased questions, overweighted in tenure decisions, everyone had a comment. Quiet until then, it was Silas that offered an oddly intuitive and sensible suggestion.
“How about we implement a mid-semester feedback system?” His fingers tapped on the table, as if drawing inspiration not from the dead wood it was now but the living tree it had once been. “It would allow us to make real time adjustments, show responsiveness to student input, maybe even increase interest in the final evaluation.”
As with any good idea the faculty debated, tossed it around the room, studying every aspect, leaving no facet unscrutinized. Silas watched on in earnest, full of energy, illuminating dark aspects, softening sharp edges. The Dean noticed Lilith growing impatient, not with the discussion, but with the path Silas seemed to be on. He was driven, sure of himself, ready to take the next step she couldn’t allow him to take.
“What are your thoughts, Miss Azari?” The Dean’s question quited the room, refocusing the attention from Silas towards Lilith. She folded her hands in front of her, not looking toward Silas, but scanning the room as if her thoughts lay somewhere in the intricate details of the portraits that lined the far wall. Settling her attention on the Dean, her shoulders relaxed, at first appearing to be a sign of resignation.
“The faculty already carries an excessive workload.” The resignation was quickly recognized for what it was, the firm assurance that she was right. Lilith let her gaze move around the room to each of the faculty, except for Silas. “The students will take the entire evaluation process less seriously if we are constantly asking them how we are doing.” She took the idea that had been growing under his nurturing energy and all but crushed it, sending its once promising fragments drifting into the aether.
What followed was like an intellectual fencing match. The rest of the staff became fixated as Silas and Lilith sparred over the idea, at first reforming, then again smashing the concept. Their debate over whether the students had the ability to assess progress or if any assessment was in the end misguided and of little use had both of them almost rising out of their seats. Even the Dean looked on as if he wasn’t witnessing a disagreement over course evaluations but a primordial battle between trust and doubt personified.
Lilith finally rested back into her seat and wiped away a bead of sweat that had formed on her brow. “Meaningful evaluation of what they are taught will always be tempered by uncertainty over the effectiveness, authenticity and value of the teaching.”
Silas, ready to offer another rebuttal, squinted his eyes as if realizing Lilith wasn’t just casting doubt on his suggestion, but on something deeper. His face eased into a smile, betraying he had no uncertainty regarding the teaching. “You have the experience and understanding.” His fingers ceased tapping as he nodded deferentially to her and mouthed the words of his mantra, I am boundless awareness.
“There’s plenty of experience and understanding around this table, Mr. Phalavan.” A nervous chuckle followed the Dean’s statement, as if attempting to cut some tension hanging in the air. The afternoon sun had sunk, casting new shadows across the room. The light still hung about Silas though, a darker hue perhaps, but still illuminating. Silas looked away from Lilith, but not before she caught a look of insight steal across his face. She couldn’t help by notice he continued to silently recite his mantra to himself as the issue of course evaluations was tabled and the meeting concluded.
Silas was reciting his affirmation, currently aloud, when he bumped into Lilith later that evening, walking through University Green. They were the only two around in the twilight as dark clouds obscured the sunset, threatening rain.
“Quite the show at the meeting today.” Stopping in front of him Lilith waved her hand, dismissing his statement. He persisted. “I didn’t know you were so passionate about student evaluations.”
She shook her head and smiled. The street lights flickered to life, the darkness encroaching enough to trigger their sensors. “Look at you Silas, so sure of yourself.” Motioning to a bench she walked to it and sat, looking up at him, concern wiping away the smile which had been so disarming mere moments before.
Silas did not sit, but followed and stood over her, taking the opportunity to shake his own head. He shone under the fluorescent lamp, distant thunder drawing their attention as it pealed over the horizon. “Storm coming.” Lilith nodded in agreement and patted the seat next to her on the bench. Finally sitting Silas exhaled a bit too loudly, releasing some tension that remained in him.
“What is it Lilith? Something not fitting the patterns of all those past lives you’ve seen?” The chuckle that followed failed to convince Lilith he was simply trying to lighten the mood, which indeed he was not. Her brow furrowed even more.
“Did you book a time with Ellen?” Her hand reached out to place itself on his hands, themselves folded on his lap, but they pulled away, leaving hers brushing his leg and withdrawing. “I care about you, Silas. Perhaps too much.”
The words of his affirmation almost formed on his lips as he turned away and sighed. A small wind picked up as the air moistened, bringing the slightly sweet smell of impending precipitation. “I know Lilith, but as I said this afternoon, you have nothing to worry about.” Her hand, more persistent this time, gently tugged his chin, turning his face back toward her.
“You said Stewart showed you something. What did he show you, Silas?” She looked at him, eyes widening in what would have been mistaken for anticipation by someone less perceptive. Instead, when combined with her tight lips and stiffened posture, it betrayed fear.
A woman opened her umbrella as she walked by, the clicking and whooshing sound drawing Silas and Lilith’s attention for a moment. They both shifted on the bench to watch before focusing on one another again.
“Oddly enough, you may be the only person I know who might understand.” Silas took a deep breath before continuing. “It was more the situation than Stewart, poor kid. Lilith, I realized I am not that, and I am also not ‘not that’.” He shook his head and laughed.  The uneasy mirth his seemingly nonsensical statement brought about in him shifted as he noticed Lilith nodding in complete understanding.
“No Silas, you are not.” Her eyes looked down and away as a brief frown seemed to deflate her usually confident manner. She was thinking, eyes looking first this way then that, the muscles in her striking face tensing, releasing. “You haven’t been for a very long time.”
“For many lifetimes?” His quip was a half-hearted attempt to return to the levity of their usual banter. It was ineffective. Lilith looked about, noticing the appearance of a few raindrops here and there, hitting the bench, the walkway.
“I have a new practice for you, to complement your mantra.” The smile was back, her eyes bright in the way they were when they had first met. A single drop of rain from the sky hit her cheek, glistening as it rolled down. “It’s a mindfulness technique. Nothing religious, but hard to master.”
Silas wiped a raindrop from her cheek as a few more fell around them. Thunder clapped, much closer. He stood, looking up into the sky with wonder. “I am boundless awareness.” 
“That you are.” She stood next to him, placing her hands on in shoulders, looking through the drops into his eyes. “This practice will bound that awareness.” Lilith tapped his chest, pointing at his heart. “A new habit to overcome the habitual.” 
    Silas tried Lilith’s practice when they returned to her apartment, while she insisted on drying her hair. His affirmation continued to run in his mind, as if given new depth since his recent revelations. The noise of the hair dryer permeated the room despite the torrential downfall and occasional rumble of thunder outside.
Watching him as she finished up, Lilith sat in a chair across from him. The slight smell of wet hair lingered. His posture was impeccable, his concentration complete. The moment seemed to stretch as she closed her eyes and appeared to slip into a practice of her own. The lights in the room became impossibly bright, yet neither of them noticed.
They sat like that a while, calm, serene, deep in their practice. Two beings breathing, across from each other in physical space, entangled in spirit. The very air charged with an energy which swirled about them, both inside and out. He looked deep into her eyes, entranced as he often had been by their limitlessness.
The apprehension in her eyes wasn’t apparent. To Silas it was an expectant look, as if she was wondering if the meditation technique was working. His affirmation slipped as something else betrayed itself in her gaze.
He shuddered as he recognized those eyes, in another place. Another rainy night, a different city, a passerby. Lilith, but not Lilith, rushing to avoid an antique car. The car was a brand new Buick Roadmaster. “Not antique.” He verbalized the thought as Lilith shook her head, agreeing that it was not. Their conversation from that morning came back to him.
“….how many times I died cold and alone.” Something more powerful than his mantra took hold of him as he uttered the phrase. He noticed his fingers numb as if from frostbite, the taste of blood in his mouth, a whisper in a foreign language he somehow understood. Impressions one after the other, so real. 
They were real. They were his experiences, lived in other times, other lives. He focused on Lilith again, she knew. “You have seen them.”
Her shoulders relaxed. After a pause she replied. “I have.” She stood up immediately and turned away from him. “You’re still adjusting. The meditation was deep. Let’s focus on that. Your breath, your body, your surroundings.”
The room came back into full focus as Silas found his breath. “I am boundless…” He couldn’t finish. 
Lilith was walking toward the other room when her phone rang. A loud peel of thunder interrupted the beginning of the conversation. Silas looked outside at the pouring rain, his head suddenly clear again. Lilith picked up her coat. “I’ll be right there.”