The heat was unabated that afternoon in the committee room, the University never having retrofitted the building it was in with air conditioning. Faculty shuffled into the formal space, dragging heavy wooden chairs over the carpeting to make space at the giant oak conference table that dominated the room. The Dean nodded as Silas and Lilith entered the room. "Great job with Mr. Sheldon this morning, you two. From what I gather, your teamwork averted what could have been quite the crisis."

"Thank you, sir." Silas beamed with what may have been mistaken for pride if the faculty weren't so aware of his boundless humility. He smiled at Lilith with a warm confidence, meaning to share in the praise with her, but she frowned.

"It remains a crisis for young Stewart." Pulling her chair in, Lilith scanned the faces in the room, confident and comfortable in what was usually a tense meeting. "He is doing well, though, and we will transfer him to North Manchester General for observation tomorrow morning."

"Yes, well." Flustered in a way they all knew only Lilith could illicit, the Dean took his own seat and shuffled the papers awaiting him. "We have much to get through this afternoon, we might as well get right to it."

As the group worked through the agenda it became increasingly difficult for the participants to discern if the light around Silas was the afternoon sun hitting him through the blinds or something radiating from within him. Lilith seemed particularly perplexed, paying more attention to his mannerisms than she was to the discussion around her. A look of focused concern set itself on her face, so stern that even Silas took notice. The moment was lost to a general groan from the room as the Dean moved on to the next agenda item.

"Ongoing issues with our course evaluation system." Low student responsiveness, outdated and biased questions, overweighted in tenure decisions, everyone had a comment. Quiet until then, it was Silas that offered an oddly intuitive and sensible suggestion.

"How about we implement a mid-semester feedback system?" His fingers tapped on the table, as if drawing inspiration not from the dead wood it was now but the living tree it had once been. "It would allow us to make real time adjustments, show responsiveness to student input, maybe even increase interest in the final evaluation."

As with any good idea the faculty debated, tossed it around the room, studying every aspect, leaving no facet unscrutinized. Silas watched on in earnest, full of energy, illuminating dark aspects, softening sharp edges. The Dean noticed Lilith growing impatient, not with the discussion, but with the path Silas seemed to be on. He was driven, sure of himself, ready to take the next step she couldn't allow him to take.

"What are your thoughts, Miss Azari?" The Dean's question quited the room, refocusing the attention from Silas towards Lilith. She folded her hands in front of her, not looking toward Silas, but scanning the room as if her thoughts lay somewhere in the intricate details of the portraits that lined the far wall. Settling her attention on the Dean, her shoulders relaxed, at first appearing to be a sign of resignation.

"The faculty already carries an excessive workload." The resignation was quickly recognized for what it was, the firm assurance that she was right. Lilith let her gaze move around the room to each of the faculty, except for Silas. "The students will take the entire evaluation process less seriously if we are constantly asking them how we are doing." She took the idea that had been growing under his nurturing energy and all but crushed it, sending its once promising fragments drifting into the aether.

What followed was like an intellectual fencing match. The rest of the staff became fixated as Silas and Lilith sparred over the idea, at first reforming, then again smashing the concept. Their debate over whether the students had the ability to assess progress or if any assessment was in the end misguided and of little use had both of them almost rising out of their seats. Even the Dean looked on as if he wasn't witnessing a disagreement over course evaluations but a primordial battle between trust and doubt personified.

Lilith finally rested back into her seat and wiped away a bead of sweat that had formed on her brow. "Meaningful evaluation of what they are taught will always be tempered by uncertainty over the effectiveness, authenticity and value of the teaching."

Silas, ready to offer another rebuttal, squinted his eyes as if realizing Lilith wasn't just casting doubt on his suggestion, but on something deeper. His face eased into a smile, betraying he had no uncertainty regarding the teaching. "You have the experience and understanding." His fingers ceased tapping as he nodded deferentially to her and mouthed the words of his mantra, I am boundless awareness.

"There's plenty of experience and understanding around this table, Mr. Phalavan." A nervous chuckle followed the Dean's statement, as if attempting to cut some tension hanging in the air. The afternoon sun had sunk, casting new shadows across the room. The light still hung about Silas though, a darker hue perhaps, but still illuminating. Silas looked away from Lilith, but not before she caught a look of insight steal across his face. She couldn't help by notice he continued to silently recite his mantra to himself as the issue of course evaluations was tabled and the meeting concluded.
